doc: nsib: edits to doc structure (#12947)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/config_and_build/bootloaders_and_dfu/fw_update.rst

The choice depends on the :ref:`type of bootloader used <ug_bootloader_adding>` for booting the new firmware release.

.. _ug_fw_update_image_versions_b0:

Configuring image version with |NSIB|
=====================================

If you have opted for :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_immutable_b0`, you set the image version for your application using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` Kconfig option.

If you opted for :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_upgradable_mcuboot`, in which case |NSIB| is your first-stage bootloader, you set the image version for MCUboot image using the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` Kconfig option, and you set the application image version as described in :ref:`ug_fw_update_image_versions_mcuboot` below.

.. _ug_fw_update_image_versions_mcuboot:

Configuring image version with MCUboot
======================================

To assign a semantic version number to your application when you have opted for :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_immutable_mcuboot` or :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_upgradable_mcuboot`, add the version string to the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION` option for the application:

> .. code-block:: console

Author: Added as a comment to https://nordicsemi.atlassian.net/browse/NCSIDB-964

.. code-block:: console

   CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION="0.1.2+3"

See the `Semantic versioning`_ webpage or :doc:`mcuboot:imgtool` for details on version syntax.

.. _ug_fw_update_image_versions_mcuboot_downgrade:
.. _ug_fw_update_downgrade_protection:

Downgrade protection
********************

The downgrade protection feature blocks downgrading the firmware version on the device.
This can be useful for security reasons, because firmware downgrade can allow attackers to bring back security vulnerabilities that were fixed by a particular firmware update.

As part of this process, the bootloader compares the new firmware image version with the version of the currently booted firmware.
The bootloader rejects the update if the new image version is lower than the version of the currently booted firmware.

The implementation is related to the :ref:`ug_fw_update_image_versions` and also depends on the type of bootloader used:

* Software-based downgrade protection is supported only by MCUboot.
  In this kind of protection, the current firmware version is encoded into the currently active image.

> * Hardware-based downgrade protection is supported by both MCUboot and |NSIB|.

Reviewer: As far as I know it's not supported when doing multi-image 4 slots with network core in MCUBoot I don't know if we need to mention this here.

Reviewer 2: We could I think, I suggest to handle it in a follow-up task. What you think @greg-fer ?

Hardware-based downgrade prevention is implemented with a counter value stored in the *provision* partition of the non-volatile storage.

> See the :ref:`ug_fw_update_image_versions` section for how to enable and configure this feature.

Reviewer 3: Is not this a subsection of the Configuring image versions section?

You can also configure the supported number of updates, but the number is limited by the size of the *Provision* area and how much of that area is taken up by other features, like public key hashes.
In addition, you can configure what firmware version of the image you want to boot.

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_end

Special handling is needed when updating the S1 variant of an image.
See :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_presigned_variants` for details.

To set options for child images, such as NSIB and MCUboot, see the :ref:`ug_multi_image_variables` section.

Using |NSIB|
============

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_nsib_start

For |NSIB|, the configuration options for implementing the anti-rollback protection with monotonic counter are the following:

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_MONOTONIC_COUNTER`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_NUM_VER_COUNTER_SLOTS`

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_nsib_end

.. _ug_fw_update_image_versions_mcuboot:

Using MCUboot
=============

For MCUboot, the configuration options for implementing the anti-rollback protection with monotonic counter are the following:

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION`

Author: @sigvartmh , would you know?

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION`

Reviewer: I've not touched this configuration, so I'm unsure. I would preface it with that it probably does not work with (mcuboot image slot > 2) network core upgrades, as the last time someone tried this, it did not work.

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION`

Reviewer 2: So that the rolling counter is updated next to the version and both need to be maintained by the user?

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION`

Reviewer: The way it work(I think) I've not looked at this part of MCUBoot in a while is that once you update with a firmware version which is greater than your current version and is proven working the rolling counter is incremented. This means you will not be able to rollback to the previous version.

I also think this only works with XiP and it rotates between the slots primary/secondary depending on the rolling counter. So the user doesn't need to maintain the rolling counter only semantic versioning of MCUBoot.

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION`

Reviewer 2: Thanks for clarification. Could you add these few sentences to documentation, please? (we could do it in a separate PR)

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION`

Reviewer: FYI: @MarekPieta @greg-fer I see that it works for swaps too. The user doesn't need to maintain the security counter themselves if you don't provide a value as it would be calculated based on the version number see:

https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-mcuboot/blob/adab597a0eb0eb9c030a7b797748a49ca89988c2/scripts/imgtool/image.py#L185

If this option is set CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HW_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION_COUNTER_VALUE 
this value is provided:  set(imgtool_security_counter --security-counter ${CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HW_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION_COUNTER_VALUE})

Maybe just keep it as auto and recommend the users to have versioning 0.0.1 on their first software and only increase revision. Sounds a bit weird as you wouldn't keep a semantic versioning scheme with this.

https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-mcuboot/blob/adab597a0eb0eb9c030a7b797748a49ca89988c2/scripts/imgtool/main.py#L256C4-L256C4

Related MCUBoot code:
https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-mcuboot/blob/adab597a0eb0eb9c030a7b797748a49ca89988c2/boot/bootutil/src/loader.c#L923

So my bad seems that the counter value is being used just set by the script automatically.

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION`

Author: Does this mean we have to change the CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION option to be enabled by default ("maybe just keep it as auto")?

Also, if we need to update the information about image version, we need to do this in the "Configuring image version with MCUboot" section.

@MarekPieta , @sigvartmh ?

> * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION`

Reviewer 2: > Does this mean we have to change the CONFIG_MCUBOOT_HARDWARE_DOWNGRADE_PREVENTION option to be enabled by default ("maybe just keep it as auto")?
> 
> Also, if we need to update the information about image version, we need to do this in the "Configuring image version with MCUboot" section.
> 
> @MarekPieta , @sigvartmh ?

Enabling MCUboot downgrade prevention by default would change current default behavior and may be a bit confusing for end users (if we opt for it, we would need to clearly inform about the change in a visible place I think).

Updating doc may be a good idea (either in this or subsequent PR).

.. note::

   The optional label or build number specified after the ``+`` character is ignored when evaluating the version.

>    For example, an existing application image with version ``0.1.2+3`` can be overwritten by an uploaded image with ``0.1.2+2``, but not by one with ``0.1.1+2``.

Reviewer: Also I think build number(what  comes after the + ) doesn't count when you do this comparison see: https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-mcuboot/blob/adab597a0eb0eb9c030a7b797748a49ca89988c2/boot/bootutil/src/loader.c#L685 
You need to enable a special option for that.

Don't know if this is important to mention

Author: So if I enable CONFIG_MCUBOOT_VERSION_CMP_USE_BUILD_NUMBER, ``0.1.2+2`` won't overwrite ``0.1.2+3``?

Reviewer 2: > So if I enable CONFIG_MCUBOOT_VERSION_CMP_USE_BUILD_NUMBER, `0.1.2+2` won't overwrite `0.1.2+3`?

IIRC yes. We may mention it in doc.

.. _ug_fw_update_downgrade_protection_hw:
.. _bootloader_monotonic_counter:

Hardware-based downgrade protection
===================================

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_start

You can implement hardware-based downgrade protection using a non-volatile monotonic counter.

Counter updates are written to slots in the *Provision* area, with each new counter update occupying a new slot.
For this reason, the number of counter updates, and therefore firmware version updates, is limited.
The *Provision* is a partition in non-volatile memory, and its location can be found using :ref:`partition_manager`.

Using a counter is optional and can be configured for the application using configuration options.
You can also configure the supported number of updates, but the number is limited by the size of the *Provision* area and how much of that area is taken up by other features, like public key hashes.
In addition, you can configure what firmware version of the image you want to boot.

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_end

Special handling is needed when updating the S1 variant of an image.

> See :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_presigned_variants` for details.

Author: @sigvartmh , can you check Marek's comment?

Looks like https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/config_and_build/bootloaders_and_dfu/bootloader_adding.html#generating-pre-signed-variants is wrongly referring to the original image as application image here: "this child image is an exact duplicate of the original image"
![image](https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/assets/41291385/07e791e8-d2cd-4e09-9a3e-11e3f38bbd16)

According to Marek, the "original image" is in reality (when testing this scenario) the MCUboot image.

Please confirm and we might need an additional issue to fix this.

> See :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_presigned_variants` for details.

Author: This will be handled in https://nordicsemi.atlassian.net/browse/NCSIDB-1121

.. _ug_fw_update_hw_downgrade_nsib:

Using |NSIB|
============

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_nsib_start

> For |NSIB|, the configuration options for implementing the anti-rollback protection with monotonic counter in your application are the following:

Reviewer 3: Tricky thing is that the feature is for NSIB child image, but the configuration is to be set for the application parent image. Can I suggest that we rephrase this:
```suggestion
To enable anti-rollback protection with monotonic counter for |NSIB|, set the following configurations in the application (parent image):
```

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_MONOTONIC_COUNTER`
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SB_NUM_VER_COUNTER_SLOTS`

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_nsib_end

To set options for child images, see the :ref:`ug_multi_image_variables` section.

.. _ug_fw_update_hw_downgrade_mcuboot:

Using MCUboot
=============

> For MCUboot, the configuration options for implementing the anti-rollback protection with monotonic counter in your application are the following:

Reviewer 3: Tricky thing is that the feature is for MCUboot child image, but the configuration is to be set for the application parent image. Can I suggest that we rephrase this:
```suggestion
To enable anti-rollback protection with monotonic counter for MCUboot, set the following configurations in the application (parent image):
```

.. _bootloader_monotonic_counter:

Hardware-based downgrade protection
===================================

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_start

You can implement hardware-based downgrade protection using a non-volatile monotonic counter.

Counter updates are written to slots in the *Provision* area, with each new counter update occupying a new slot.
For this reason, the number of counter updates, and therefore firmware version updates, is limited.
The *Provision* is a partition in non-volatile memory, and its location can be found using :ref:`pm_generated_output_and_usage_pm_report`.

Using a counter is optional and can be configured for the application using configuration options.
You can also configure the supported number of updates, but the number is limited by the size of the *Provision* area and how much of that area is taken up by other features, like public key hashes.
In addition, you can configure what firmware version of the image you want to boot.

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_end

.. _ug_fw_update_hw_downgrade_nsib:

Downgrade protection using |NSIB|
=================================

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_nsib_start

> To enable anti-rollback protection with monotonic counter for |NSIB|, set the following configurations in the application (parent image):

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if this does not need to be set for both bootloader and application. @sigvartmh, could you confirm, please?

Reviewer: For this setting it is enough to just set it in the application(parent image).

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarification. In that case I think we are ready to merge this one and further improvements can be added in separate PRs.

   The optional label or build number specified after the ``+`` character is ignored when evaluating the version.

>    An existing application image with version ``0.1.2+3`` can be overwritten by an uploaded image with ``0.1.2+2``, but not by one with ``0.1.1+2``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   For example, an existing application image with version ``0.1.2+3`` can be overwritten by an uploaded image with ``0.1.2+2``, but not by one with ``0.1.1+2``.
```

.. _ug_fw_update_downgrade_protection_hw:
.. _bootloader_monotonic_counter:

Hardware-based downgrade protection
===================================

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_start

You can implement hardware-based downgrade protection using a non-volatile monotonic counter.

Counter updates are written to slots in the *Provision* area, with each new counter update occupying a new slot.

> For this reason, the number of counter updates, and therefore firmware version updates, is limited.

Reviewer 3: As a reader, I find myself wondering what this "Provision area" is. Is it part of non-volatile memory? How can I find out where it is? Do we have documentation referring to this area somewhere else?
```suggestion
For this reason, the number of counter updates, and therefore firmware version updates, is limited. The *Provision* is a partition in non-volatile memory, and its location can be found using :ref:`Partition Manager <partition_manager_report>`.
```

Reviewer 3: This is not "using the partition manager". However, a user would use the "parititon manager report" instead

Author: Fixed.

Using a counter is optional and can be configured for the application using configuration options.
You can also configure the supported number of updates, but the number is limited by the size of the *Provision* area and how much of that area is taken up by other features, like public key hashes.
In addition, you can configure what firmware version of the image you want to boot.

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_end

Special handling is needed when updating the S1 variant of an image.
See :ref:`ug_bootloader_adding_presigned_variants` for details.

To set options for child images, such as NSIB and MCUboot, see the :ref:`ug_multi_image_variables` section.

.. _ug_fw_update_hw_downgrade_nsib:

Using |NSIB|
============

.. bootloader_monotonic_counter_nsib_start

> For |NSIB|, the configuration options for implementing the anti-rollback protection with monotonic counter are the following:

Reviewer 3: I think we should be clear that these options are intended for the application and not for the child image. The same for the below configurations for MCUboot.

Author: Moved.
